README.md, before:

# swarm #

A robust and fast clustering method for amplicon-based studies.

The purpose of **swarm** is to provide a novel clustering algorithm to
handle large sets of amplicons. Traditional clustering algorithms
results are strongly input-order dependent, and rely on an arbitrary
**global** clustering threshold. **swarm** results are resilient to
input-order changes and rely on a small **local** linking threshold
*d*, the maximum number of differences between two
amplicons. **swarm** forms stable high-resolution clusters, with a
high yield of biological information.

Table of Content
================

* [Quick start](#quick_start)
* [Install](#install)
* [Prepare amplicon fasta files](#prepare_amplicon)
   * [Linearization](#linearization)
   * [Dereplication](#dereplication)
   * [Launch swarm](#launch)
* [Parse swarm results](#parse)
   * [Refine swarm OTUs](#refine_OTUs)
   * [Count the number of amplicons per OTU](#OTU_sizes)
   * [Get the seed sequence for each swarm](#extract_seeds)
   * [Get fasta sequences for all amplicons in a swarm](#extract_all)
* [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
* [New features](#features)
   * [version 1.2.6](#version126)
   * [version 1.2.5](#version125)
   * [version 1.2.4](#version124)
   * [version 1.2.3](#version123)
   * [version 1.2.2](#version122)
   * [version 1.2.1](#version121)
   * [version 1.2.0](#version120)
   * [version 1.1.1](#version111)
   * [version 1.1.0](#version110)
       * [Statistics](#stats)
       * [Uclust-like output format](#uclust)
* [Citation](#citation)
* [Contact](#contact)

<a name="quick_start"/>
## Quick start ##

**swarm** most simple usage is (with default parameters, use `-h` to
  get help or see the user manual for details):

```
./swarm amplicons.fasta
```

<a name="install"/>
## Install ##

Get the source code and a **swarm** binary from
[GitHub](https://github.com/torognes/swarm "swarm public repository")
using the
[ZIP button](https://github.com/torognes/swarm/archive/master.zip
"swarm zipped folder") or git:

```
git clone https://github.com/torognes/swarm.git
cd swarm/
```

Use the command `make` to compile **swarm** from scratch.

If you have administrator privileges, you can make **swarm**
accessible for all users. Simply copy the binary to `/usr/bin/`. The
man page can be installed this way:

```
gzip -c swarm.1 > swarm.1.gz
mv swarm.1.gz /usr/share/man/man1/
```

Once installed, the man page can be accessed with the command `man
swarm`.

<a name="prepare_amplicon"/>
## Prepare amplicon fasta files ##

To facilitate the use of **swarm**, we provide examples of shell
commands that can be use to format and check the input fasta file
(warning, this may not be suitable for very large files). The amplicon
clipping step (adaptor and primer removal) and the filtering step are
not discussed here.

<a name="linearization"/>
### Linearization ###

Amplicons written on two lines are easier to manipulate: one line for
the fasta header, one line for the sequence (tested with GNU Awk
4.0.1).

```
awk 'NR==1 {print ; next} {printf /^>/ ? "\n"$0"\n" : $1} END {printf "\n"}' amplicons.fasta > amplicons_linearized.fasta
```

<a name="dereplication"/>
### Dereplication ###

To speed up the clustering process, strictly identical amplicons
should be merged. This step is not mandatory, but it is an important
time saver, especially for highly redundant high-throughput sequencing
results.

```
grep -v "^>" amplicons_linearized.fasta | \
grep -v [^ACGTacgt] | sort -d | uniq -c | \
while read abundance sequence ; do
    hash=$(printf "${sequence}" | sha1sum)
    hash=${hash:0:40}
    printf ">%s_%d_%s\n" "${hash}" "${abundance}" "${sequence}"
done | sort -t "_" -k2,2nr -k1.2,1d | \
sed -e 's/\_/\n/2' > amplicons_linearized_dereplicated.fasta
```

Amplicons containing characters other than "ACGT" are discarded. The
dereplicated amplicons receive a meaningful unique name (hash codes),
and are sorted by decreasing number of copies and by hash codes (to
guarantee a stable sorting). The use of a hashing function also
provides an easy way to compare sets of amplicons. If two amplicons
from two different sets have the same hash code, it means that the
sequences they represent are identical.

<a name="launch"/>
### Launch swarm ###

If you want **swarm** to partition your dataset with the finest
resolution (a local number of differences *d* = 1) on a quadricore
CPU:

```
./swarm -d 1 -t 4 amplicons.fasta > amplicons.swarms
```

See the user manual (man page and PDF) for details on **swarm**'s
options and parameters.

<a name="parse"/>
## Parse swarm results ##

To facilitate the use of **swarm**, we provide examples of shell
commands that can be use to parse **swarm**'s output. We assume that
the amplicon fasta file was prepared as describe above (linearization
and dereplication).

<a name="refine_OTUs"/>
### Refine swarm OTUs ###

Chains of amplicons can form when using short sequences, a
slowly-evolving marker or a high *d* value. Using amplicon abundance
information, these chains can be easily identified and broken to
improve **swarm**'s precision. Until we include that functionality
directly into **swarm**, we provide a simple to use python script, and
recommend to apply it to all **swarm** results. The script, tested
with python 2.7, is located in the folder `scripts`, and can be used
as follows:

```
python swarm_breaker.py --help
python swarm_breaker.py -f amplicons.fasta -s amplicons.swarms 2> amplicons.log > amplicons.swarms2
```

The script produces refined OTUs and writes them to the standard
output. It also writes debugging information to the standard error,
that could be redirected to a log file, or redirected to
`/dev/null`. As of today, `swarm_breaker.py` is rapid enough to deal
with 454 data sets, but might be too slow for large Illumina data
sets. We are currently testing a much faster algorithm, and plan to
release it as soon as possible.

<a name="OTU_sizes"/>
### Count the number of amplicons per OTU ###

You might want to check the size distribution of OTU (number of
amplicons in each OTU), and count the number of singletons (OTUs
containing only one amplicon).

```
awk '{print NF}' amplicons.swarms | sort -n | uniq -c
awk 'NF == 1 {sum+=1} END {print sum}' amplicons.swarms
```

The number of amplicons in each OTU and several other metrics are
available in the statistics file produced by swarm when using the -s
option.

<a name="extract_seeds"/>
### Get the seed sequence for each OTU ###

It is frequent for subsequent analyses to keep only one representative
amplicon per OTU (usually the seed) to reduce the computational
burden. That operation is easily done with **swarm** results.

```
SEEDS=$(mktemp)
cut -d " " -f 1 amplicons.swarms | sed -e 's/^/>/' > "${SEEDS}"
grep -A 1 -F -f "${SEEDS}" amplicons.fasta | sed -e '/^--$/d' > amplicons_seeds.fasta
rm "${SEEDS}"
```

<a name="extract_all"/>
### Get fasta sequences for all amplicons in a OTU ###

For each OTU, get the fasta sequences for all amplicons. Warning, this
loop can generate a very large number of files. To limit the number of
files, a test can be added to exclude swarms with less than *n*
elements.

```
INPUT_SWARM="amplicons.swarms"
INPUT_FASTA="amplicons.fasta"
OUTPUT_FOLDER="swarms_fasta"
AMPLICONS=$(mktemp)
mkdir "${OUTPUT_FOLDER}"
while read swarm ; do
    tr " " "\n" <<< "${swarm}" | sed -e 's/^/>/' > "${AMPLICONS}"
    seed=$(head -n 1 "${AMPLICONS}")
    grep -A 1 -F -f "${AMPLICONS}" "${INPUT_FASTA}" | sed -e '/^--$/d' > "./${OUTPUT_FOLDER}/${seed/>/}.fasta"
done < "${INPUT_SWARM}"
rm "${AMPLICONS}"
```

<a name="troubleshooting"/>
## Troubleshooting ##

If **swarm** exists with an error message saying `This program
requires a processor with SSE2`, your computer is too old to run
**swarm** (or based on a non x86-64 architecture). **swarm** only runs
on CPUs with the SSE2 instructions, i.e. most Intel and AMD CPUs
released since 2004.

<a name="features"/>
## New features##

<a name="version126"/>
### version 1.2.6 ###

**swarm** 1.2.6 add an option (`-r` or `--mothur`) to format the output file as
a mothur-compatible list file instead of the native swarm format.
When **swarm** encounters an illegal character in the input sequences it will
now report the illegal character and the line number.

<a name="version125"/>
### version 1.2.5 ###

**swarm** 1.2.5 can be run on cpus without the POPCNT feature. It automatically
checks whether the cpu feature is available and uses the appropriate code.
The code that avoids POPCNT is just slightly slower. Only basic SSE2 is now required.

<a name="version124"/>
### version 1.2.4 ###

**swarm** 1.2.4 changes the name of the new option from
`--break_swarms` to `--break-swarms` for consistency with other
options, and also adds a companion script `swarm_breaker.py` to refine
swarm results (`scripts` folder).

<a name="version123"/>
### version 1.2.3 ###

**swarm** 1.2.3 adds an option (`-b` or `--break_swarms`) to output all
pairs of amplicons to stderr. The data can be used for post-processing
of the results to refine the swarms. The syntax of the inline assembly
code is also changed for compatibility with more compilers.

<a name="version122"/>
### version 1.2.2 ###

**swarm** 1.2.2 fixes an issue with incorrect values in the statistics
  file (maximum generation and radius of swarms). This version is also
  a bit faster.

<a name="version121"/>
### version 1.2.1 ###

**swarm** 1.2.1 removes the need for a SSE4.1 capable CPU and should
  now be able to run on most servers, desktops and laptops.

<a name="version120"/>
### version 1.2.0 ###

**swarm** 1.2.0 introduces a pre-filtering of similar amplicons based
  on *k*-mers. This eliminates most of the time-consuming pairwise
  alignments and greatly improves speed. The speedup can be more than
  100-fold compared to previous swarm versions when using a single
  thread with a large set of amplicons. Using multiple threads induces
  a computational overhead, but becomes more and more efficient as the
  size of the amplicon set increases.

<a name="version111"/>
### version 1.1.1 ###

**swarm** now works on Apple computers. This version also corrects an
  issue in the pairwise global alignment step that could lead to
  sub-optimal alignments. Slightly different alignments may result
  relative to previous version, giving slightly different swarms.

<a name="version110"/>
### version 1.1.0 ###

**swarm** 1.1.0 introduces new optimizations and is 20% faster than
  the previous version on our test dataset. It also introduces two new
  output options: statistics and uclust-like format.

<a name="stats"/>
#### Statistics ####

By specifying the `-s` option to **swarm** it will now output detailed
statistics about each swarm to a specified file. It will print the
number of unique amplicons, the number of copies, the name of the seed
and its abundance, the number of singletons (amplicons with an
abundance of 1), the number of iterations and the maximum radius of
the swarm (i.e. number of differences between the seed and the
furthermost amplicon). When using input data sorted by decreasing
abundance, the seed is the most abundant amplicon in the swarm.

<a name="uclust"/>
#### Uclust-like output format ####

Some pipelines use the
[uclust output format](http://www.drive5.com/uclust/uclust_userguide_1_1_579.html#_Toc257997686
"page describing the uclust output format") as input for subsequent
analyses. **swarm** can now output results in this format to a
specified file with the `-u` option.

<a name="citation"/>
## Citation ##

To cite **swarm**, please refer to:

Mahé F, Rognes T, Quince C, de Vargas C, Dunthorn M. (2014) Swarm:
robust and fast clustering method for amplicon-based studies. PeerJ
PrePrints 2:e386v1 http://dx.doi.org/10.7287/peerj.preprints.386v1

<a name="contact"/>
## Contact ##

You are welcome to:

* submit suggestions and bug-reports at: https://github.com/torognes/swarm/issues
* send a pull request on: https://github.com/torognes/swarm/
* compose a friendly e-mail to: Frédéric Mahé <mahe@rhrk.uni-kl.de> and Torbjørn Rognes <torognes@ifi.uio.no>

Commit message:

Add the post-processing script to the run-swarm example

README.md, after:

# swarm #

A robust and fast clustering method for amplicon-based studies.

The purpose of **swarm** is to provide a novel clustering algorithm to
handle large sets of amplicons. Traditional clustering algorithms
results are strongly input-order dependent, and rely on an arbitrary
**global** clustering threshold. **swarm** results are resilient to
input-order changes and rely on a small **local** linking threshold
*d*, the maximum number of differences between two
amplicons. **swarm** forms stable high-resolution clusters, with a
high yield of biological information.

Table of Content
================

* [Quick start](#quick_start)
* [Install](#install)
* [Prepare amplicon fasta files](#prepare_amplicon)
   * [Linearization](#linearization)
   * [Dereplication](#dereplication)
   * [Launch swarm](#launch)
* [Parse swarm results](#parse)
   * [Refine swarm OTUs](#refine_OTUs)
   * [Count the number of amplicons per OTU](#OTU_sizes)
   * [Get the seed sequence for each swarm](#extract_seeds)
   * [Get fasta sequences for all amplicons in a swarm](#extract_all)
* [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
* [New features](#features)
   * [version 1.2.6](#version126)
   * [version 1.2.5](#version125)
   * [version 1.2.4](#version124)
   * [version 1.2.3](#version123)
   * [version 1.2.2](#version122)
   * [version 1.2.1](#version121)
   * [version 1.2.0](#version120)
   * [version 1.1.1](#version111)
   * [version 1.1.0](#version110)
       * [Statistics](#stats)
       * [Uclust-like output format](#uclust)
* [Citation](#citation)
* [Contact](#contact)

<a name="quick_start"/>
## Quick start ##

**swarm** most simple usage is (with default parameters, use `-h` to
  get help or see the user manual for details):

```
./swarm amplicons.fasta
```

<a name="install"/>
## Install ##

Get the source code and a **swarm** binary from
[GitHub](https://github.com/torognes/swarm "swarm public repository")
using the
[ZIP button](https://github.com/torognes/swarm/archive/master.zip
"swarm zipped folder") or git:

```
git clone https://github.com/torognes/swarm.git
cd swarm/
```

Use the command `make` to compile **swarm** from scratch.

If you have administrator privileges, you can make **swarm**
accessible for all users. Simply copy the binary to `/usr/bin/`. The
man page can be installed this way:

```
gzip -c swarm.1 > swarm.1.gz
mv swarm.1.gz /usr/share/man/man1/
```

Once installed, the man page can be accessed with the command `man
swarm`.

<a name="prepare_amplicon"/>
## Prepare amplicon fasta files ##

To facilitate the use of **swarm**, we provide examples of shell
commands that can be use to format and check the input fasta file
(warning, this may not be suitable for very large files). The amplicon
clipping step (adaptor and primer removal) and the filtering step are
not discussed here.

<a name="linearization"/>
### Linearization ###

Amplicons written on two lines are easier to manipulate: one line for
the fasta header, one line for the sequence (tested with GNU Awk
4.0.1).

```
awk 'NR==1 {print ; next} {printf /^>/ ? "\n"$0"\n" : $1} END {printf "\n"}' amplicons.fasta > amplicons_linearized.fasta
```

<a name="dereplication"/>
### Dereplication ###

To speed up the clustering process, strictly identical amplicons
should be merged. This step is not mandatory, but it is an important
time saver, especially for highly redundant high-throughput sequencing
results.

```
grep -v "^>" amplicons_linearized.fasta | \
grep -v [^ACGTacgt] | sort -d | uniq -c | \
while read abundance sequence ; do
    hash=$(printf "${sequence}" | sha1sum)
    hash=${hash:0:40}
    printf ">%s_%d_%s\n" "${hash}" "${abundance}" "${sequence}"
done | sort -t "_" -k2,2nr -k1.2,1d | \
sed -e 's/\_/\n/2' > amplicons_linearized_dereplicated.fasta
```

Amplicons containing characters other than "ACGT" are discarded. The
dereplicated amplicons receive a meaningful unique name (hash codes),
and are sorted by decreasing number of copies and by hash codes (to
guarantee a stable sorting). The use of a hashing function also
provides an easy way to compare sets of amplicons. If two amplicons
from two different sets have the same hash code, it means that the
sequences they represent are identical.

<a name="launch"/>
### Launch swarm ###

If you want **swarm** to partition your dataset with the finest
resolution (a local number of differences *d* = 1, with
post-processing to eliminate the potential chained OTUs) on a
quadricore CPU:

```
./swarm -d 1 -t 4 amplicons.fasta > amplicons.swarms
python ../scripts/swarm_breaker.py -f amplicons.fasta \
    -s amplicons.swarms 2> amplicons.log > amplicons.swarms2
```

See the user manual (man page and PDF) for details on **swarm**'s
options and parameters.

<a name="parse"/>
## Parse swarm results ##

To facilitate the use of **swarm**, we provide examples of shell
commands that can be use to parse **swarm**'s output. We assume that
the amplicon fasta file was prepared as describe above (linearization
and dereplication).

<a name="refine_OTUs"/>
### Refine swarm OTUs ###

Chains of amplicons can form when using short sequences, a
slowly-evolving marker or a high *d* value. Using amplicon abundance
information, these chains can be easily identified and broken to
improve **swarm**'s precision. Until we include that functionality
directly into **swarm**, we provide a simple to use python script, and
recommend to apply it to all **swarm** results. The script, tested
with python 2.7, is located in the folder `scripts`, and can be used
as follows:

```
python swarm_breaker.py --help
python swarm_breaker.py -f amplicons.fasta -s amplicons.swarms 2> amplicons.log > amplicons.swarms2
```

The script produces refined OTUs and writes them to the standard
output. It also writes debugging information to the standard error,
that could be redirected to a log file, or redirected to
`/dev/null`. As of today, `swarm_breaker.py` is rapid enough to deal
with 454 data sets, but might be too slow for large Illumina data
sets. We are currently testing a much faster algorithm, and plan to
release it as soon as possible.

<a name="OTU_sizes"/>
### Count the number of amplicons per OTU ###

You might want to check the size distribution of OTU (number of
amplicons in each OTU), and count the number of singletons (OTUs
containing only one amplicon).

```
awk '{print NF}' amplicons.swarms | sort -n | uniq -c
awk 'NF == 1 {sum+=1} END {print sum}' amplicons.swarms
```

The number of amplicons in each OTU and several other metrics are
available in the statistics file produced by swarm when using the -s
option.

<a name="extract_seeds"/>
### Get the seed sequence for each OTU ###

It is frequent for subsequent analyses to keep only one representative
amplicon per OTU (usually the seed) to reduce the computational
burden. That operation is easily done with **swarm** results.

```
SEEDS=$(mktemp)
cut -d " " -f 1 amplicons.swarms | sed -e 's/^/>/' > "${SEEDS}"
grep -A 1 -F -f "${SEEDS}" amplicons.fasta | sed -e '/^--$/d' > amplicons_seeds.fasta
rm "${SEEDS}"
```

<a name="extract_all"/>
### Get fasta sequences for all amplicons in a OTU ###

For each OTU, get the fasta sequences for all amplicons. Warning, this
loop can generate a very large number of files. To limit the number of
files, a test can be added to exclude swarms with less than *n*
elements.

```
INPUT_SWARM="amplicons.swarms"
INPUT_FASTA="amplicons.fasta"
OUTPUT_FOLDER="swarms_fasta"
AMPLICONS=$(mktemp)
mkdir "${OUTPUT_FOLDER}"
while read swarm ; do
    tr " " "\n" <<< "${swarm}" | sed -e 's/^/>/' > "${AMPLICONS}"
    seed=$(head -n 1 "${AMPLICONS}")
    grep -A 1 -F -f "${AMPLICONS}" "${INPUT_FASTA}" | sed -e '/^--$/d' > "./${OUTPUT_FOLDER}/${seed/>/}.fasta"
done < "${INPUT_SWARM}"
rm "${AMPLICONS}"
```

<a name="troubleshooting"/>
## Troubleshooting ##

If **swarm** exists with an error message saying `This program
requires a processor with SSE2`, your computer is too old to run
**swarm** (or based on a non x86-64 architecture). **swarm** only runs
on CPUs with the SSE2 instructions, i.e. most Intel and AMD CPUs
released since 2004.

<a name="features"/>
## New features##

<a name="version126"/>
### version 1.2.6 ###

**swarm** 1.2.6 add an option (`-r` or `--mothur`) to format the output file as
a mothur-compatible list file instead of the native swarm format.
When **swarm** encounters an illegal character in the input sequences it will
now report the illegal character and the line number.

<a name="version125"/>
### version 1.2.5 ###

**swarm** 1.2.5 can be run on cpus without the POPCNT feature. It automatically
checks whether the cpu feature is available and uses the appropriate code.
The code that avoids POPCNT is just slightly slower. Only basic SSE2 is now required.

<a name="version124"/>
### version 1.2.4 ###

**swarm** 1.2.4 changes the name of the new option from
`--break_swarms` to `--break-swarms` for consistency with other
options, and also adds a companion script `swarm_breaker.py` to refine
swarm results (`scripts` folder).

<a name="version123"/>
### version 1.2.3 ###

**swarm** 1.2.3 adds an option (`-b` or `--break_swarms`) to output all
pairs of amplicons to stderr. The data can be used for post-processing
of the results to refine the swarms. The syntax of the inline assembly
code is also changed for compatibility with more compilers.

<a name="version122"/>
### version 1.2.2 ###

**swarm** 1.2.2 fixes an issue with incorrect values in the statistics
  file (maximum generation and radius of swarms). This version is also
  a bit faster.

<a name="version121"/>
### version 1.2.1 ###

**swarm** 1.2.1 removes the need for a SSE4.1 capable CPU and should
  now be able to run on most servers, desktops and laptops.

<a name="version120"/>
### version 1.2.0 ###

**swarm** 1.2.0 introduces a pre-filtering of similar amplicons based
  on *k*-mers. This eliminates most of the time-consuming pairwise
  alignments and greatly improves speed. The speedup can be more than
  100-fold compared to previous swarm versions when using a single
  thread with a large set of amplicons. Using multiple threads induces
  a computational overhead, but becomes more and more efficient as the
  size of the amplicon set increases.

<a name="version111"/>
### version 1.1.1 ###

**swarm** now works on Apple computers. This version also corrects an
  issue in the pairwise global alignment step that could lead to
  sub-optimal alignments. Slightly different alignments may result
  relative to previous version, giving slightly different swarms.

<a name="version110"/>
### version 1.1.0 ###

**swarm** 1.1.0 introduces new optimizations and is 20% faster than
  the previous version on our test dataset. It also introduces two new
  output options: statistics and uclust-like format.

<a name="stats"/>
#### Statistics ####

By specifying the `-s` option to **swarm** it will now output detailed
statistics about each swarm to a specified file. It will print the
number of unique amplicons, the number of copies, the name of the seed
and its abundance, the number of singletons (amplicons with an
abundance of 1), the number of iterations and the maximum radius of
the swarm (i.e. number of differences between the seed and the
furthermost amplicon). When using input data sorted by decreasing
abundance, the seed is the most abundant amplicon in the swarm.

<a name="uclust"/>
#### Uclust-like output format ####

Some pipelines use the
[uclust output format](http://www.drive5.com/uclust/uclust_userguide_1_1_579.html#_Toc257997686
"page describing the uclust output format") as input for subsequent
analyses. **swarm** can now output results in this format to a
specified file with the `-u` option.

<a name="citation"/>
## Citation ##

To cite **swarm**, please refer to:

Mahé F, Rognes T, Quince C, de Vargas C, Dunthorn M. (2014) Swarm:
robust and fast clustering method for amplicon-based studies. PeerJ
PrePrints 2:e386v1 http://dx.doi.org/10.7287/peerj.preprints.386v1

<a name="contact"/>
## Contact ##

You are welcome to:

* submit suggestions and bug-reports at: https://github.com/torognes/swarm/issues
* send a pull request on: https://github.com/torognes/swarm/
* compose a friendly e-mail to: Frédéric Mahé <mahe@rhrk.uni-kl.de> and Torbjørn Rognes <torognes@ifi.uio.no>
